---
layout: post
title: "My Love for Debugging"
date: 2016-07-01
---

Bugs are amazing things. As programmers, we typically set out with the intent of creating a seamless program that always runs perfectly, or in other words, is bug-free. Yet they always seem to rear their ugly heads, even in what seems like the simplest of situations. But do not despair! Fixing bugs is where I have learned the most and often I only truly understand the flow of the program I'm working on during this process.

## Nobody Writes Perfect Code

Earlier this week, I worked with my manager on a change to our existing database model. He had already started on it previously so had a skeleton in place, but most of the pieces needed to be finished. We followed the existing structure and made whatever changes were needed to create our new table and integrate it properly with the existing application. We wrote tests, but when we ran them, they failed. This was a good thing - now we knew, we were trying to do something meaningful and had written tests that were reasonably robust. We stepped through the code, included some print statements, and eventually figured out one bug. So we ran the tests again. Failed, again. We repeated the above process, fixed another bug, and continued, until eventually we managed to pass all the tests. Then we tested on the server using [Postman](https://www.getpostman.com/), and no surprises, failed there initially too. Again, we repeated our debugging process and eventually figured out the issue, and finally we had a working piece of software. The lesson here is that even someone as immensely experienced as my manager makes plenty of mistakes while coding, but rigorous testing and debugging makes that a non-issue in the shipped product. We probably spent 20% of the time writing the initial solution, and 80% debugging. Debugging is a key skill and integral part of being a software engineer.

## The Debugger is your Friend

Last week, I faced a particularly baffling bug. I was developing iOS in Swift and had just finished up creating a view component and laying it out the way I wanted, but the code was a little messy and unreadable, so the responsible engineer that I am, I started [refactoring](http://rigor.com/blog/2014/01/benerefactor). The first time round, I just pulled all the different components I was creating inside one function and split them into multiple functions. After cleaning that up and fixing any compile errors, I reran the app and suddenly most of my components were appearing twice. Other than my top most label, the view had appeared twice on the screen - one below the other!

__First lesson:__ Refactor and test piece by piece, instead of trying to refactor everything at once. My refactoring process seemed to have introduced a very strange bug that at first glance I did not understand at all. I then checked out my changes (Hoorah for Git!) to return to a presumably working state and repeated the process step by step until I could reproduce the bug, and that happened immediately after I had made one of my previously local variables global. That stumped me. How on earth could turning a local variable for the height of the next component global cause everything to render more times than before? I turned to my mentor and after explaining the situation to him, he suggested that perhaps everything had always been rendering twice, except before, the second render was just on top of the first. Genius. As I thought about it, that explanation made a lot of sense.

__Second Lesson:__ To confirm, I used the debugger and set a breakpoint in the *layoutSubviews* function, ran the program, and as expected, the breakpoint was triggered twice. This happened because of a fundamental misunderstanding of the *layoutSubviews* function. Instead of creating my components there, I really should have created them in the view initializer (specifically *required init?*), and then moved them around as needed in *layoutSubviews*. Clearly, this process was long and could have been avoided with some more up front research about the functionality of built in iOS functions and how they interact with the rest of the application (but I'm warning you - Apple Developer docs are not the easiest to understand). However, I'm glad I struggled through it - that process taught me far more than just building the view and getting it right the first time would have.

## Key Takeaways

* __Write Robust Tests:__ You will not be able to find non-obvious bugs unless you test those use-cases. It is particularly important to write tests for edge cases (like null or empty inputs).
* __Spend Time Refactoring:__ As you can see from my example, the only reason I found that bug (which actually turned out to be one that exists in many of our view components), was because I started refactoring what I had written to make it cleaner while it was still fresh in my mind. Not to mention refactoring reduces technical debt, too.
* __Use Debugging Tools:__ Most modern languages come with debuggers that you can use to step through code and see the state of the program and its variables and various points in its execution. This is extremely powerful to help you see everything that is going on and narrow down how a bug is created.
* __Include Print Statements If Needed:__ Sometimes it isn't possible to use the debugger. In that case print statements such an easy way to keep up with the program's state and figure out when a particular value changes in an unexpected way.

So next time you find a bug in your program, don't despair! Take a calm and structured approach to understanding the program and what created the bug, and remember, it is a great learning experience! The more you practice, the better you will get - after all it is an [art](https://remysharp.com/2015/10/14/the-art-of-debugging)